Meeting 4: The First Coursework
CST3990 Undergraduate Individual Projects
Can Başkent
Department of Computer Science, Middlesex University, London
c.baskent@mdx.ac.uk canbaskent.net/logic
Overview of Today’s Session
1. The Proposal
2. Ethics Approval
3. The Literature Review
1/19
The Proposal
The Proposal
A project proposal is a brief description of what you intend to do.
Typically, a project proposal is only a few pages long.
On these few pages you need to introduce the reader to the
• subject area: What is the topic and scope of your project?
• aim: What is the goal of your project?
• arguments: Why is it important to investigate the chosen topic?
• objectives Preliminary ideas for how you intend to achieve the
aim.
2/19
Choosing a Subject Area
Here is a roadmap for choosing a subject area for your project.
3/19
How to Choose a Subject Area
Start early Start thinking about possible subject areas early, and let
the decision regarding the chosen area of study be refined
incrementally. In this way, you can avoid hastily made decisions that
are not well motivated.
Another benefit of starting early is that before the project begins,
you may have time to identify and check important sources of
information. The time it takes to, for example, identify and order
literature or discuss a proposal with members of staff, should not be
underestimated.
4/19
How to Choose a Subject Area
Which subject area to choose is a decision that only you can make;
nobody else will make this decision for you.
• One of the most crucial factors for succeding with a project is
the motivation for undertaking the work in the chosen subject
area. You should strive to choose the subject area that you are
most interested in.
• Choose a subject area where you have the necessary skills. Do
not choose a subject area in which, for example, you have failed
courses.
• A combination of areas is usually a good source of interesting
problems and topics for project proposals. At the same time, it
is not recommended that you choose a project which combines
more than two areas, since they can become too complex to
handle.
5/19
How to Choose a Subject Area
Ask yourself whether you
• have previously in your studies encountered subject areas or
courses that you felt were especially interesting,
• would like to work within a particular subject area in the future
6/19
How to Choose a Problem to Focus on
Once you have found a subject area for your project, it is time to
focus your interests within the chosen area.
You focus your interest by identifying a problem within the subject
area that you would like to explore.
7/19
How to Choose a Problem to Focus on
Here are some ways to identify a problem within the subject area:
• Ask yourself what you would like to do within a particular area
(or what you can do, given your current knowledge).
• Read the literature, since others may have already identified and
reported the issues that are worthwhile to explore. You may
even find that somebody else has already done what you were
planning to do. In this situation you can adjust your aim, so that
it targets something that other information sources do not cover.
• Ask potential supervisors early. Frequently, project proposals
will be in the context of the supervisor’s own professional
research areas. This may increase the likelihood that he or she
will be highly motivated to act as a supervisor for the project.
• Ask companies and organisations, as they may have
encountered problems that they do not have time, knowledge or
resources to investigate themselves and discuss them with a
potential supervisor in your department. 8/19
How to Choose a Problem to Focus on
Your initial ideas can be further refined by asking yourself – what
type of project would I really like to do?
Should it be, for example,
• a descriptive project,
• a theory oriented project,
• an applied project,
• a comparison of theory and practice?
Keep in mind that most thesis projects use elements from more than
one of the above categories.
9/19
References
By properly referencing the material your work is based upon, you
achieve several things.
You will then be able to
• show how your work extends the current state-of-the-art
knowledge in the area,
• show the originality of your work,
• give credit to other people’s work (and thereby avoid being
accused of plagiarism),
• support and validate arguments made in your report (any claim
made in the report must be supported either by your own
research or by citing results published by other people),
• show that you are familiar with the work done in the area.
10/19
References
By simply looking at your reference list, an experienced reader or
reviewer will see whether you have used references from well known
sources, or sources that are not of such good quality.
Furthermore, you can strengthen your arguments in the report if you
base them on well known references which have been published in
high-quality scientific journals, or in proceedings from renowned
conferences.
Another reason why references are needed is to make your work
reproducible. Anyone who reads your report should be able to
reproduce your work, and therefore all sources you have used must
be clearly identified.
11/19
Citations
Make sure that you are aware of how to make citations and
referencing styles.
12/19
Ethics Approval
Ethics Approval
You must have a conversation with your supervisor as soon as
possible in the development of your project regarding the ethical
implication and cost of your project.
If your project is low risk, your supervisor may sign it off by
completing the above simple form. You will have to include that
form in your second coursework submission.
If your project is not low risk, you will have to apply for ethics
approval. If you said ”YES” to any question in the Screening form, you
must apply for the approval via the MOREform.
If the project involves direct collection of data from people (or the
usage of such data that has been already collected from human
participants) then it is likely an ethical review is required.
13/19
The Literature Review
Literature Analysis
By literature analysis we mean a systematic examination of a
problem, by means of an analysis of published sources, undertaken
with a specific purpose in mind.
With the problem and specific objective established, i.e. what should
be analysed, the next problem concerns appropriate use of relevant
sources.
14/19
Literature Analysis
You may use a combination of the following, in order to ensure that
you have considered all relevant sources:
• Bibliographic databases: By searching or browsing their content
using a sensible strategy, e.g. by using a set of keywords which
your background reading and problem statement have identified
as potentially relevant, by using a reference to a given source
and locating additional sources
• Journals and conference proceedings: By browsing the table of
contents in conference proceedings, or by searching for relevant
articles using the search function at a journal’s web site.
15/19
Literature Analysis
A related difficulty is that of completeness. One of the difficulties in
a literature analysis is to know when one has collected enough
material. In other words, at what stage should you stop collecting
material?
Finally, expert opinions, such as your supervisor’s, can be of great
help in ensuring that your intended strategy is feasible.
It may be that at certain points in the process, depending on what
emerges, you need to reconsider your strategy and try other
techniques for ensuring relevance and completeness. In these
situations, it is good to have someone monitoring your progress;
someone who will be able to help by suggesting planned or
unplanned deviations. If you do deviate from your plan, you should
be able to give good reasons for doing so.
16/19
The First Steps
The deadline for the First Coursework is in Week 5. We expect you
develop some ideas towards your main goal in your project by then.
You should then introduce them in your First Coursework.
17/19
Structure of Your First Coursework
Briefly, your First Coursework should have the following sections:
1. Introduction
2. Motivation
3. Literature Review
4. First Steps
5. Ethics Forms: screening form (and Ethics Monitor form, if
applicable)
18/19
References
These slides are based on our textbook
Mikael Berndtsson & Jörgen Hansson & Björn Olsson & Björn
Lundell, Thesis Projects: A Guide for Students in Computer Science
and Information Systems, Second Edition, Springer, 2008.
19/19
Thank you!
19/19


he First Coursework is a formal piece of writing. It is supposed to have three parts.
The first part, the proposal, will be composed of a few pages and explain the aim of the
project: why it matters, how it can be motivated. The second part, the literature review,
will be a substantial review of the state of the art in the area. Even if you are carrying
out a software-based project, you will scan the literature and write a critical review. The
third and the final part is what we call “first-steps”. There you will talk about what you
have achieved towards your goal so far.
Also note that the first coursework must contain your ethics form – either the “Ethics
Screening Form”, signed by your supervisor, or a copy of the submitted MORE form. It
is part of the marking scheme of the first coursework as you can see in Section 9.
